# NBA-analysis

For this project I decided to use R to do an analysis of the 2003-2004 season of the NBA. The data I used was gathered with the R SportsAnalytics package, which sources its data from http://www.dougstats.com. This data includes the players name, team, position, number of games played, total minutes played and 19 other columns pertaining to player performance throughout the season.

Prior to performing any analysis, I chose to review the dataset to look for dirty data and to generate a quick summary of a few stats. I did find and correct three players who had a typo in their team name and also decided to add three calculated columns, the total number of two-point field goals, the points from those goals and the total points from three point shots.

In the 2003-2004 season there were 29 unique teams and 442 unique players. The average number of minutes a player played throughout the season was one thousand three hundred, which is over 21 hours! The season saw a total of just over two hundred and twenty two thousand points scored, over one hundred thousand rebounds and twelve thousand blocked shots.

For an individual team, I decided to analyze the Timberwolves as they had one of the best records at 58 and 24 and Kevin Garnet, who was one of the top overall players during the season. When looking at the top three players from their team for total points, rebounds and blocks, you can see that Garnet was the best on the team for all three. Latrell Sprewell was also a star player for the team, but trailed Garnet in rebounds by over 800!

During this season the top team by record was the Pacers at 61 and 21. They were also the only team in the top 5 to come from the Eastern conference. Second and third was the Timberwolves and the Spurs out of the Midwest division, followed by the Lakers and the Kings out of the Pacific division. The 6th place team in this category was the Pistons with a record of 54 and 28 and while they may have not made the top 5, they went on to win the championship against the Lakers.

Looking at the top 10 teams by total points we see a pretty close spread and oddly enough only the Kings and Lakers were in the top 5 for total wins. The Mavericks was the highest overall for points, but placed 7th in the season for number of wins, followed by the Kings, Supersonics and the Bucks.

When comparing the point distribution across the Timberwolves, we can see three players contributed the most in this category. Kevin Garnett provided just under two thousand points, 368 from free throws, 33 from threes and one thousand five hundred and eighty six from field goals. Sam Cassell provided one thousand ninety two field goals, 222 threes and 289 free throws. Finally, Latrell Sprewell shot 838 field goals, 297 threes and 240 free throws.

This boxplot focuses on the point distribution across all players on each of the highest scoring teams. I found it interesting to note that Michael Redd from the Bucks and Predr Stojakovic from the Kings both scored so many points, one thousand seven hundred seventy six and one thousand nine hundred and sixty four respectively, they were a outlier on the plot. An outlier happens when a value is greater than 1.5 times the interquartile range, or the range within the box. The Lakers actually had two outliers, Shaquille O’Neal and Kobe Bryant, who scored one thousand four hundred and thirty nine and one thousand five hundred and fifty seven total points.

Reviewing the same data as the previous box plot, but instead looking at it by type of goal, we see a pretty even distribution. The Kings lead in the three-point category with one thousand eight hundred and three, but are actually in last for regular two pointers with five thousand and four. The Mavericks lead in this category with five thousand seven hundred thirty two, but are in second to last for free throws with one thousand four hundred eighty four, which the Bucks lead at one thousand seven hundred eighty eight. The Mavericks lead overall with eight thousand seven hundred forty three points, with the Grizzlies pulling in at 10th with eight thousand and five total points.

When we size up the top 10 point scorers for the season, we see an interesting distribution. Kevin Garnett, who we looked at before, was the season leader with one thousand nine hundred eighty seven total points. From the previous plot we again see Predr Stojakovic and Michael Redd placing 2nd and 5th, but neither Kobe or Shaq appear on this list, both falling just outside of the top 10. While Garnett clearly dominated in the two pointer category, Stojakovic had 200 more three pointers than Tracy McGrady, who was second best and almost 22 times as many as Garnet.

Looking back from 2018 to 1999 there have only been nine different teams to win the championship. The Lakers had the most wins with five in 1999, 2000, 2001, 2008 and 2009. The Spurs won four in 2002, 2004, 2006, and 2013. The Heat won three 2005, 2011 and 2012. The Warriors also won three championships in 2014, 2016 and 2017. The Pistons, Celtics, Mavericks, Cavaliers and Raptors each only had one win, which was in 2003, 2007, 2010, 2015 and 2018 respectively.
